Add Oculus PWA article (#7006)
GoogleChrome/web.dev: src/site/content/en/blog/pwas-on-oculus-2/index.md

---
layout: post
title: 'PWAs on Oculus Quest&nbsp;2'
authors:
  - thomassteiner
hero: image/8WbTDNrhLsU0El80frMBGE4eMCD3/B7zNhOVvzK3O71sQyLKe.jpg
alt:
  'Person wearing an Oculus Quest 2 device with a PWA sticker on it spreading their arms with Quest
  controllers in both hands.'
subhead: >
  The Oculus Quest 2 is a virtual reality (VR) headset created by Oculus, a division of Meta.

>   Developers can now build and distribute 2D Progressive Web Apps that take advantage of Oculus

Author: I add an aside at the very beginning now:

```md
{% Aside %}
This article is _not_ focused on apps making use of [WebXR](/tags/webxr/), a group of standards that are used
together to support rendering 3D scenes to hardware designed for presenting virtual worlds (VR), or
for adding graphical imagery to the real world (AR).

Instead, this article is focused on 2D Progressive Web Apps, that is, PWAs that are primarily aimed at
being consumed on regular screens, but that the user can also experience on their Oculus Quest&nbsp;2 device.
{% endAside %}

```

  and test your PWA on the Oculus Quest 2.
date: 2021-12-21
tags:
  - blog
  - capabilities
  - progressive-web-apps
---

## The Oculus Quest&nbsp;2

The [Oculus Quest&nbsp;2](https://www.oculus.com/quest-2/) is a virtual reality (VR) headset created
by Oculus, a division of Meta. It is the successor to the company's previous headset, the Oculus
Quest. The device is capable of running as both a standalone headset with an internal, Android-based
operating system, and with Oculus-compatible VR software running on a desktop computer when
connected over USB or Wi-Fi. It uses the Qualcomm
[Snapdragon XR2](https://www.qualcomm.com/news/onq/2020/10/29/oculus-quest-2-how-snapdragon-xr2-powers-next-generation-vr)
system on a chip with 6&nbsp;GB of RAM. The Quest&nbsp;2's display is a singular fast-switch LCD
panel with a 1,832&nbsp;×&nbsp;1,920 pixels per eye resolution, which can run at a refresh rate of
up to 120&nbsp;Hz.

{% Img src="image/8WbTDNrhLsU0El80frMBGE4eMCD3/g0IQmlLaOiLWqwQuvnhQ.jpeg", alt="Oculus Quest 2 device with controllers.", width="800", height="304" %}

## The Oculus Browser

> Currently there are two browsers available for the Oculus Quest&nbsp;2,

Author: I can't find anything about this. It is a [game](https://store.steampowered.com/app/541420/Hoverboards_VR/#:~:text=Hoverboards%20VR%20is%20a%20light,feel%20of%20surfing%20or%20snowboarding.), though.

[Firefox Reality](https://www.oculus.com/experiences/quest/2180252408763702/) and the built-in
[Oculus Browser](https://www.oculus.com/experiences/quest/1916519981771802). This article focuses on
the latter. The Oculus website
[introduces](https://developer.oculus.com/documentation/web/browser-intro/) the Oculus Browser as
follows.

_"Oculus Browser provides support for the latest web standards and other technologies to help you
create VR experiences on the web. Today's 2D web sites work great in Oculus Browser because it's
powered by the Chromium rendering engine. It's further optimized for Oculus headsets to get the best
performance and to enable web developers take advantage of the full potential of VR with new APIs,

> like WebXR. Through WebXR, we're opening the doors to the next frontier of the web."_

Reviewer: Should this be a blockquote? Seems like it ought to be.

Author: It should be, but unfortunately it looks horrible. It's not meant for long quotes like that, but short inspirational quotes like "Be yourself; everyone else is already taken". Maybe a feature request?

Reviewer 2: I agree. The blockquote macro is designed more as a callout than as something to run in the main flow of text.

{% Img src="image/8WbTDNrhLsU0El80frMBGE4eMCD3/R4SwrV05Pqap583Rzr4L.jpeg", alt="Oculus Browser with three browser windows open.", width="800", height="450" %}

### User agent

> The browser's user agent string at the time of writing can be broken down as follows.

Author: I wanted to somehow let the reader know that I have broken it down in several lines for legibility, but of course actually it's just one line.

```bash
Mozilla/5.0 (X11; Linux x86_64; Quest 2)
AppleWebKit/537.36 (KHTML, like Gecko)
OculusBrowser/18.1.0.2.46.337441587
SamsungBrowser/4.0
Chrome/95.0.4638.74
VR
Safari/537.36
```

As you can see, the current version `18.1.0.2.46.337441587` of the Oculus Browser is based on Chrome
`95.0.4638.74`, that is only one version behind the current stable version of Chrome, which is
`96.0.4664.110`. If the user switches to mobile mode, `VR` changes to `Mobile VR`.

> {% Img src="image/8WbTDNrhLsU0El80frMBGE4eMCD3/E3929PxcGa7GCxKoTffh.png", alt="Oculus Browser About page.", width="800", height="449" %}

Author: `chrome://version` is supported, yes.

### User interface

The browser's user interface that you can check out in the screenshot above has the following
features (top row from left to right):

- Back button
- Reload button
- Site information
- URL bar
- Create bookmark button
- Resize button with narrow, medium, and wide options as well as a zoom feature
- Request mobile website button
- Menu button with the following options:
  - Enter private mode
  - Close all tabs
  - Settings
  - Bookmarks
  - Downloads
  - History
  - Clear browsing data

The bottom row includes the following features:

- Close button
- Minimize button
- Three dots button with back, forward, and reload options

### Refresh rate and device pixel ratio

For Oculus Quest&nbsp;2, Oculus Browser renders both 2D&nbsp;web page content and WebXR at
90&nbsp;Hz refresh rate. When watching fullscreen media, Oculus Browser optimizes the device refresh
rate based on the frame rate of the video, for example, 24&nbsp;fps. The Oculus Quest&nbsp;2 has a
device pixel ratio of 1.5 for crisp text.

## PWAs in Oculus Browser and the Oculus Store

On October&nbsp;28, 2021, [Jacob Rossi](https://twitter.com/jacobrossi), Product Management Lead at

> Meta (Oculus), [shared](https://twitter.com/jacobrossi/status/1453776349299019778) that PWAs are

Author: I added a link that this is live already and formulated it accordingly.

The default dimensions are 1,000&nbsp;×&nbsp;625 px.

### Controlling PWAs

PWAs can be controlled with the Oculus left and right controllers, Bluetooth mice and keyboards, and
via hand tracking. Scrolling works via the thumb sticks on the Oculus controllers, or by pinching
the thumb and the index finger and moving in the desired direction. To select something, the user
can point and pinch.

{% Video src="video/8WbTDNrhLsU0El80frMBGE4eMCD3/20e7SXFMLC22gqW8HzRa.mp4", autoplay="true", loop="true", muted="true" %}

### Permissions for PWAs

Permissions in Oculus Browser work pretty much the same way as in Chrome. The state is shared
between apps running in the browser and installed PWAs, so users can switch between the two
experiences without having to grant the same permissions again.

Albeit many permissions are implemented, not all features are then actually supported. For example,
while requesting the geolocation permission succeeds, the device never actually gets a location.
Similarly, the various hardware APIs like [WebHID](/hid/), [Web Bluetooth](/bluetooth/), etc. all
pass feature detection, but don't actually show a picker that would let the user pair the Oculus

> with a hardware device. I suppose this will be refined once the browser matures.

Author: Reformulated to "I suppose feature detectability of APIs will be refined once the browser matures".

{% Img src="image/8WbTDNrhLsU0El80frMBGE4eMCD3/fTX92hn8bIMpWVMoBUjE.png", alt="Permissions in Oculus Browser.", width="800", height="575" %}

### Debugging PWAs via Chrome DevTools

After
[enabling Developer Mode](https://developer.oculus.com/documentation/native/android/mobile-device-setup/#enable-developer-mode),
debugging PWAs on Oculus Quest&nbsp;2 works exactly as described in
[Remote debug Android devices](https://developer.chrome.com/docs/devtools/remote-debugging/).

1. On the device, browse to the desired site in Oculus Browser.
1. Launch Google Chrome.

> 1. Navigate to `chrome://inspect/#devices`.

Author: Clarified the steps to say what needs to happen where.

or platforms like [SideQuest](https://sidequestvr.com/), without requiring store approval and
without sideloading, which allows them to get an app directly to end users, even if it is early in
development, experimental, or aimed at a unique audience.

## Exemplary PWAs on the Oculus Quest&nbsp;2

### PWAs by Meta

Multiple Meta divisions have created PWAs for the Oculus Quest&nbsp;2, for example
[Instagram](https://www.oculus.com/experiences/quest/6102857836422862) and
[Facebook](https://www.oculus.com/experiences/quest/6126469507395223). These PWAs run in standalone
app windows that do not have a URL bar and that can be freely resized.

{% Img src="image/8WbTDNrhLsU0El80frMBGE4eMCD3/m5NoDaB7hyFOvrxHF9oS.jpeg", alt="Facebook Oculus Quest 2 app.", width="800", height="450" %}

{% Img src="image/8WbTDNrhLsU0El80frMBGE4eMCD3/gxYCh0Z9R3vXRU0MWsIB.jpeg", alt="Instagram Oculus Quest 2 app", width="800", height="450" %}

### PWAs by other developers

At the time of this writing, there are a couple of other developers that have published PWAs for the
Oculus Quest&nbsp;2 on the Oculus Store.
[Spike](https://www.oculus.com/experiences/quest/4949538568409451) lets users experience all the

> essential work tools like email, chat, calls, notes, tasks, and to-dos from their inbox in a virtual

Author: This is the boiler plate from their store description. I add that this happens in the app.

environment hub.

{% Img src="image/8WbTDNrhLsU0El80frMBGE4eMCD3/yATTFGQRz75I2JrIAUSz.jpeg", alt="Spike Oculus Quest 2 app.", width="800", height="450" %}

Another example is [Smartsheet](https://www.oculus.com/experiences/quest/4636949963023496), a

> dynamic workspace that empowers teams to manage projects, automate workflows, and rapidly build new

Author: Again boiler plate from their store description. I use yours.

solutions.

More PWAs like Slack, Dropbox, or Canva are coming, as teased in a
[video](https://www.facebook.com/watch/?v=4637130066326723) featuring Jacob Rossi that was released
in the context of Facebook's Connect conference in 2021.

## Creating PWAs for Oculus

Meta has outlined the required steps in their
[documentation](https://developer.oculus.com/documentation/web/pwa-gs/). In general, PWAs that are
installable in Chrome should oftentimes work out of the box.

### Web App Manifest requirements

There are some important differences compared to

> [Chrome's installability criteria](https://web.dev/install-criteria/#criteria) and the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[Chrome's installability criteria](/install-criteria/#criteria) and the
```

Reviewer 2: We have permission to keep the Fugu stuff together until we have feature parity between the two sites.

[Web App Manifest spec](https://w3c.github.io/manifest/), for example regarding language constraints
(Oculus only supports left-to-right languages at the moment) or the optionality of `start_url`,

> which Chrome strictly requires for an app to be installable. Oculus offers a

Author: Broke this down in more sentences.

[command line tool](https://developer.oculus.com/documentation/web/pwa-packaging/) that developers
can use to create PWAs for the Oculus Quest&nbsp;2, which allows them to pass the missing (or
override the existing) parameters in the Web App Manifest.

> | Name         | Required | Description                                                                                                        |

Reviewer 2: Here's an alternative way of doing this table that gives you a more efficient use of space. (Truncated)

```
| Name         | Description                                                                                                        |
| ------------ | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ |
| `name`       | (Required) The name of the PWA. Currently Oculus only supports left-to-right languages for the name.               |
| `short_name` | A shorter version of the app name, if needed.                                                                      |
```

Author: Done.

| ------------ | -------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ |
| `name`       | yes      | The name of the PWA. Currently Oculus only supports left-to-right languages for the name.                          |

> | `display`    | yes      | Currently this value must be `"standalone"` or `"minimal-ui"`. Oculus currently does not support any other values. |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| `display`    | yes      | Either `"standalone"` or `"minimal-ui"`. Oculus currently does not support any other values. |
```

| `short_name` | no       | A shorter version of the app name, if needed.                                                                      |

> | `scope`      | no       | This field allows developers to specify what URL or paths should be considered as part of the app.                 |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| `scope`      | no       | The URL or paths that should be considered as part of the app.                 |
```

Reviewer 2: A best practice for short tables is to use similar grammatical structures. This is one of the permitted uses of sentence fragments.

> | `start_url`  | no       | Developers can specify a starting URL to load.                                                                     |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| `start_url`  | no       | The URL to show at app launch.                                                                     |
```

Oculus has a number of optional **proprietary** Web App Manifest fields that can be used to
customize the PWA experience.

> | Name                    | Required | Description                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          |

Reviewer 2: The proposal for the previous table would let you get rid of the 'Required' column. Here it works because you've already established that only required items are labeled and you've stated in the introduction that these are all optional. To emphasize the point, you could move the word 'optional' inside the bold markdown.

Author: Done.

| ----------------------- | -------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ |
| `ovr_package_name`      | no       | Sets the package name of the APK generated for the PWA. This must be in reverse domain name notation, e.g., `"com.company.app.pwa"`. If not set, developers must provide a package name to the command line tool with the (then required) parameter `--package-name`.                                                                                                                                                                |

> | `ovr_multi_tab_enabled` | no       | If `true`, this boolean field will give the PWA a tab bar similar to Oculus Browser. In multi-tab PWAs, internal links that target a new tab (`target="_new"` or `target="_blank"`) will open in new tabs within the PWA window. This differs from single-tab PWAs where such links would open to a Oculus Browser window. **This feature is currently being standardized as [Tabbed Application Mode](/tabbed-application-mode/).** |

Reviewer 2: Standardized for the web generally? Why isn't this an external link?

Author: In this case the link goes out to https://github.com/w3c/manifest/issues/737. I'll change.

> | `ovr_scope_extensions`  | no       | This field allows a PWA to include more web pages within the scope of the web application. It consists of a JSON dictionary containing extension URLs or wildcard patterns. **This feature is currently being standardized as [Scope Extensions for Web Apps](https://github.com/WICG/manifest-incubations/blob/gh-pages/scope_extensions-explainer.md).**                                                                           |

Reviewer: Per the style guide, [we're not supposed to use Markdown tables](https://web.dev/handbook/web-dev-components/#tables). That link will have more info on the proper table component syntax (however, it may have changed, so you may have to use a `w-table` class on the `<table>` element).

Author: Replaced by the HTML syntax.

> | `ovr_scope_extensions`  | no       | This field allows a PWA to include more web pages within the scope of the web application. It consists of a JSON dictionary containing extension URLs or wildcard patterns. **This feature is currently being standardized as [Scope Extensions for Web Apps](https://github.com/WICG/manifest-incubations/blob/gh-pages/scope_extensions-explainer.md).**                                                                           |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| `ovr_scope_extensions`  | no       | Allows a PWA to include more web pages within the scope of the web application. It consists of a JSON dictionary containing extension URLs or wildcard patterns. **This feature is currently being standardized as [Scope Extensions for Web Apps](https://github.com/WICG/manifest-incubations/blob/gh-pages/scope_extensions-explainer.md).**                                                                           |
```

### Packaging PWAs with the command line tool

To sideload PWAs onto the Oculus Quest&nbsp;2, developers must use a
[command line tool](https://developer.oculus.com/documentation/web/pwa-packaging/) called

> `ovr-platform-util` with the `create-pwa` command to generate the APK. The output file name can be
> set via the `-o` parameter, the Android SDK to use needs to be set via the `--android-sdk`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`ovr-platform-util` with the `create-pwa` command to generate the APK. Set the output file name 
via the `-o` parameter. The Android SDK to use needs to be set via the `--android-sdk`
```

> parameter. Assuming a manifest file called `manifest.json` in the present working directory, the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
parameter. Assuming a manifest file called `manifest.json` in the current working directory, the
```

> `--manifest-content-file` parameter helps the tool to determine the relevant configuration fields

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`--manifest-content-file` parameter helps the tool determine the relevant configuration fields
```

from the Web App Manifest. Alternatively, developers can point the tool at the live URL of a

> manifest via the `--web-manifest-url` parameter. To leave the manifest as pure as possible, the
> `--package-name` parameter can be used with a value in reverse domain name notation (e.g.,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
manifest via the `--web-manifest-url` parameter. To leave the manifest as pure as possible, use
the `--package-name` parameter with a value in reverse domain name notation (e.g.,
```

`com.company.app.pwa`), rather than adding the proprietary `ovr_package_name` field to the manifest.

```bash
ovr-platform-util create-pwa -o output.apk --android-sdk ~/bin/android-10 --manifest-content-file manifest.json --package-name com.company.app.pwa
```

### Installing PWAs with `adb`

After creating the APK, developers can sideload the PWA with the `adb` command when the Oculus

> Quest&nbsp;2 device is connected via USB and when the connected computer is trusted. Sideloaded apps

Reviewer 2: >when the connected computer is trusted

What does this mean? How do I learn if my computer is trusted? If this isn't the place to explain this, maybe provide links.

Author: The link to the relevant docs is there, but the trust step was missing. Added in https://github.com/GoogleChrome/developer.chrome.com/pull/1867.

appear in an **Unknown Sources** section in the app drawer.

```bash
adb install output.apk
```

### Testing multi-tab apps

> To test multi-tab apps, I have created a little

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To test multi-tab apps, I created a little
```

> [test PWA](https://tomayac.github.io/oculus-pwa-test/) that demonstrates the various link features;

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
[test PWA](https://tomayac.github.io/oculus-pwa-test/) that demonstrates the various link features:
```

namely opening a new in-PWA tab, staying on the current tab, opening a new browser window, and
opening in a WebView staying on the current tab. Create a locally installable copy of this app by
running the commands below on your machine.

```bash
ovr-platform-util create-pwa -o test.apk --android-skd ~/bin/android-10 --web-manifest-url https://tomayac.github.io/oculus-pwa-test/manifest.json --package-name com.example.pwa
adb install test.apk
```

> You can see a screencast of the test app in action embedded below.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Here's a screencast of the test app:
```

{% YouTube "3ZlxCjW9rtg" %}

## An Oculus version of SVGcode

> To take the instructions for an actual spin, I have created an Oculus version of my most recent PWA,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To take the instructions for a spin, I created an Oculus version of my most recent PWA,
```

[SVGcode](/svgcode/). You can download the resulting APK file
[`output.apk`](https://drive.google.com/file/d/1ieGjwIXGGWmh0j9WpBdWqP7Bns3McNr1/view?usp=sharing)

> from my Google Drive. If you want to investigate the package further, I have made available a

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
from my Google Drive. If you want to investigate the package further, I have a
```

[decompiled version](https://drive.google.com/drive/folders/1EFtXK9ApJiJitfysZS_Z7iIWWiKEglu-?usp=sharing),
too. Find the build instructions in
[`package.json`](https://github.com/tomayac/SVGcode/blob/6b23adf63a0a3a1b3828866dbb7db0f10206397f/package.json#L16).

Using the app in VR works fine, including the ability to open and save files (though not using the
[File System Access API](/file-system-access/), but using the

> [fallback approach](/browser-fs-access/#the-traditional-way-of-dealing-with-files)). The only thing

Reviewer 2: This is an incomplete sentence. Please fix.

Author: Done.

> I could not get to work is pinch-zooming. My expectation was for it to work by pressing the trigger

Reviewer 2: Do you mean 'I could not get pinch zooming to work'? This sentence says you didn't start working on the feature.

Author: That the feature didn't work. It's implemented. I have reformulated accordingly.
